This book grew out of courses which I taught at Cornell University and 
the University of Warwick during 1969 and 1970. I wrote it because of a 
strong belief that there should be readily available a semi-historical and geometrically motivated exposition of J. H. C. Whitehead's beautiful theory of 
simple-homotopy types; that the best way to understand this theory is to 
know how and why it was built. This belief is buttressed by the fact that the 
major uses of, and advances in, the theory in recent times-for example, the 
s-cobordism theorem (discussed in §25), the use of the theory in surgery, its 
extension to non-compact complexes (discussed at the end of §6) and the 
proof of topological invariance (given in the Appendix)-have come from 
just such an understanding. 
A second reason for writing the book is pedagogical. This is an excellent 
subject for a topology student to "grow up" on. The interplay between 
geometry and algebra in topology, each enriching the other, is beautifully 
illustrated in simple-homotopy theory. The subject is accessible (as in the 
courses mentioned at the outset) to students who have had a good onesemester course in algebraic topology. I have tried to write proofs which meet 
the needs of such students. (When a proof was omitted and left as an exercise, 
it was done with the welfare of the student in mind. He should do such 
exercises zealously.) 
There is some new material here1-for example, the completely geometric 
definition of the Whitehead group of a complex in §6, the observations on the 
counting of simple-homotopy types in §24, and the direct proof of the 
equivalence of Milnor's definition of torsion with the classical definition, 
given in §16. But my debt to previous works on the subject is very great. 
I refer to [Kervaire-Maumary-deRham], [Milnor 1] and above all [J. H. C. 
Whitehead 1,2,3,4]. The reader should turn to these sources for more material, 
alternate viewpoints, etc. 
I am indebted to Doug Anderson and Paul Olum for many enlightening 
discussions, and to Roger Livesay and Stagg Newman for their eagle-eyed 
reading of the original manuscript. Also I would like to express my appreciation to Arletta Havlik, Esther Monroe, Catherine Stevens and Dolores 
Pendell for their competence and patience in typing the manuscript. 
My research in simple-homotopy theory was partly supported by grants 
from the National Science Foundation and the Science Research Council of 
Great Britain. I and my wife and my children are grateful to them.